# text-mining

Callum Nicholson

Project Writeup and Reflection 

For my project I used Project Gutenberg as my data source. I am analysing "The Prince", a political treatise by Niccolo Machiavelli. My major analysis focus was on sentiment and summary analysis. My project started off with functions allowing me to analyze data within the text. This included looking into most common words, number of unique words there are, total words, etc. Then, I moved on to a more in depth analysis on sentiment analysis. The sentiment analysis was split into two parts. Firstly, I took each of the introductory sections, the biographical elements written about Niccolo Machiavelli. These biographical elements are different sections on the different periods of Machiavelli's life. These sections are represented in figures 1 through 5, and figures 6 and 7 are written by Machiavelli. Given Machiavelli's controversial nature, I was intrigued to see if the author had any biases, or certain sentiments depending on different time periods of Machiavelli's life. Then, I took all of Machiavelli's writing in the book in order to gain an insight about what type of sentiment he approaches his writing with. I seperated this into his dedication to Lorenzo Di Piero De’ Medici and the rest of his writing. I assumed he would be more positive in his dedication, given the fact that an entire chapter is set aside for a dedicaiton. Overall my goal with this project was to gain more confidence with data structures and systematically approaching python problems with a large scope. Furthermore, I aim to work in product, and learning different methods to collect, process and analyse data will be essential for me. 

I pooled data from the Project Gutenberg API and started off cleaning the data, in order to be able to process it through Python. There were various steps to cleaning the data. This included removing whitespaces, making the data into a string, removing punctuation, decoding the data, and removing stopwords. However, some functions required some of the data to not be fully cleaned. For instance, when looking at total word count, stopwords were important to be included in order to account for all the words in the text. The total word count without stopwords was around 22,000 words, much less than the 54,000 word count for the entire text. When looking at the top 10 most frequent words in the book, I had to add various stopwords to the stopwords list, in order to make sure I gained the most valuable insights. One of the major parts was seperating the text into its respective sections. I seperated the text into its introductory biographical parts and then had a section with Machiavelli's writing (his dedication to Medici and the rest of his text).

The word frequency gave insights into the major topics being discussed such as royalty through the words "prince", "duke" and "king" (shown in figure 9). Furthermore, it was evident that the "state" was a major part of the book by looking at Figure 9. This analysis showed be that I can see how Python could be utilized to make quick summaries about books. From this data, one could see that royalty and the state are important points of discussion. By taking this a step further, in the future I could even build summaries and have my own discussion points in a class based off of analysis I have done through Python. For example, I could reflect that Machiavelli was very positive towards Medici in his book, and spoke of topics of royalty and the state. Different types of data structures were utilised in this assignment for the various functions. These data structures included lists, strings and dictionaries. Different types of charts were also used: histogram and a pie chart. By combining the summary data, with the sentiment analysis, this shows how analysis through python can reflect what is discussed in a text, as well as the views of the authors. For the histogram I had to chose between lists or a data frame. I ended up picking lists as I wanted to be able to append values to functions and practice the various tools we have been provided with in class. 

(When referring to figures, I am referring to figures that are in the data_visualiser folder)

In terms of results, firstly, I made sure to summarize the data in the text to make it more simple to interpret. The various functions for my summary analysis included word frequency, word frequency histogram, total words, total number of unique words. The total word count was 58,389 including stopwords, with 5,400 unique words. The most frequently used words (excluding stopwords) are represented in the figures 9 and 10. Figure 9 represents the top 10 words used throughout the entire book including Machiavelli's writing and the small biographical element of the book before Machiavelli's writing begins. It is important to note that the majority of these will be coming from Machiavelli's writing as most of the text is written by Machiavelli, except the small biographical elements. The three most common words (except for stopwords) were prince, men, and castruccio. 

Then, the sentiment analysis allowed us to gain some insights from the author of the book. By looking through figures 1 through 5 we can see how the author views Niccolo Machiavelli. Overall, we can see an overall positive sentiment when writing about Machiavelli's life. Figure 8 shows us all the statistics about the various sections and the sentiment analysis, and figures 1 through 7 put these numbers on pie charts. The compound value was deleted in order to solely visualise positive, neutral, and negative sentiments. For the biographical elements, the most positive section was in fact the youth section with 15% positive sentiment, and only 3.1% negative sentiment. On the other hand, the most negative is "the man and his work" section, discussing the later stages of Machiavelli's life. This shows that the author may have been more supportive of Machiavelli and his initial views through his youth, whereas his views and actions in the later stages of his life may have not appealed as much to the author of the biographical elements. The positive and negative sentiments in this section are very close (11% and 10.2% respectively). Then, Machiavelli is most positive when writing his dedicaiton section. This section is 20% positive sentiment whereas the rest of his writing is an average of 12.5% positive. We can visualise the difference by looking at figures 7 and 8. Overall, Machiavelli has to have a pretty balanced sentiment in his writing, as his positive sentiment is 12.5% and his negative sentiment is 11.6%. This could be interesting to compare and contrast with his different writings. 

I believe this project gave me the ability to gain insights about Machiavelli as a writer and about the author who wrote his biographical elements. This also showed me the scope to which Python can be used to analyse texts, as using sentiment analysis as well as text summaries, a summary of the book can be made. What went well was my improvement in my ability to debug. Throughout this assignment, I felt more confident as I was going through debugging my code. I used the tools we had been practicing in class towards debugging in order to find the problems within my code, and towards the end of my assignment this process became a lot smoother. In future, I would like to add text similarity. I would like to analyse every single chapter of Machiavelli's section and use the fuzz library to see the similarity scoring of the text. Furthermore, this could also be used across seperate writings from Machiavelli to see if he has similarity between his writing. Furthermore, the text summary could also be compared to see if a writing pattern can be identified. What took most of my time was processing the data. Different functions required different forms of data cleaning. In the future I realise I just need to sit down and lay out what type of data each function needs in order to properly be processed. Before getting started, I wish I was more confident with cleaning data. However, my struggles have made me much more adept at handling data cleaning issues now. 
